Statistical Foundations of Machine Learning
Practice Set 1
1 Homework problems
Note: solutions to problems in this section are to be submitted and will be graded. Deadline
for submission is Sun, 22nd Feb. Total marks : 15. Justify your answers and present all
calculations/argumentsclearly.
1. AliceandBobareamongagroupofeightcollegestudentswhoareinterestedindebating.
Three students are picked randomly from this group to represent the college at an inter-
collegiate fest. Let A be the event that Alice is among those picked, and B denote the
eventthatBobisamongthosepicked.
(a) P(A) [1mark]
(b) P(A|B) [1mark]
(c) P(A∪B) [1mark]
2. You flip a fair coin thrice and note the outcome (in {H,T}3). Define the following
events.
Aistheeventthatalltosseshavethesameresult(allH orallT).
B istheeventthattheyouseeatleastoneH andatleastoneT.
C istheeventthatyouseeatmostoneH.
(a) AreeventsAandB independent? [1mark]
(b) AreeventsB andC independent? [1mark]
(c) AreeventsAandC independent? [1mark]
3. Show that if two events A and B are independent, then Ac and Bc are also independent.
[2marks]
4. Give examples for the following cases. For each of them, explain the sample space and
theeventsproperly.
Onlyassigningnumericalvaluessatisfyingtheconditionswillnotsuffice
(a) P(A∩B) > P(A)P(B) [2marks]
(b) P(A∩B) < P(A)P(B) [2marks]
5. A and B throw a pair of dice alternately. A wins the game if he gets a total of 9 and B
wins the game if he gets a total of 4. If A starts the game, then find the probability that
Bwins. [3marks]
1
2 Practice problems
Note: problemsinthissectionareforpractice,solutionsnottobesubmitted
1. Consideraknockouttournamentwithkroundsofmatchesincludingthefinal. Recallthat
in each round, half of the remaining players are ‘knocked out’ of the tournament. For
example,thegrandslamtennistournamentsstartwith128playersandhavesevenrounds
of matches. Define a suitable sample space for the random outcome of the tournament.
Eachelementofthissamplespaceneednotbeequallylikely.
2. A course is taught by four instructors. Before every lecture, the instructors draw lots
and one of them is randomly chosen to teach on that day. What is the probability that in
N classes, all the lecturers would have taught at least once. Generalise to k instructors
teachingthecourse.
3. Numbers1,2,3,4,5,and6arerandomlyplacedonacircle. Whatistheprobabilitythat
theyareplacedinincreasingorder?
4. A and B play the following game of dice. Both roll a die once. A gets is assigned the
numberobtainedonitsroll. IfB rollsanumberotherthanone,itisassignedwhateverit
rolls. However, if B rolls a one, then it rolls again and will be assigned whatever it rolls
the second time (even if it rolls a one). Whoever is assigned the highest value wins. If
thereisatieAwins. WhatistheprobabilitythatAwinsthegame.
5. There are n urns and the r-th urn contains (r −1) brown balls and (n−r) black balls.
You pick an urn at random and pick two balls at random without replacement. What is
the probability that the second ball is black. What is the conditional probability that the
secondballisblackgiventhatthefirstballisblack.
6. I choose a number uniformly in the range [1,1000000]. Using inclusion exclusion prin-
ciple, determine the probability that the chosen number is divisible by one or more of 4,
6,and9.
7. An urn starts off with one black and one brown ball. Sample one ball from this urn and
put the ball back into the urn along with another ball of the same color. Now there are
three balls in the urn. Repeat this action N times, i.e., sample a ball and put the ball and
another ball of the same color back urn into the urn. There are now (N +2) balls in the
urn. Findtheprobabilitythattherek blackballsintheurn.
8. Consider a best-of-five tennis match in which whoever wins three sets first wins the
match. The players are evenly matched, i.e., each one wins a set with equal probability.
Findtheprobabilitythatloserhaswonk sets.
9. A coin is tossed independently n times. The probability of heads at each toss is p. At
eachtimek (k = 2,3,...,n),wegetarewardifkth tosswasaheadandtheprevioustoss
wasatail. LetA betheeventthatarewardisobtainedattimek.
k
(a) AreeventsA andA independent?
k k+1
2
(b) AreeventsA andA independent?
k k+2
Justifyallanswers.
10. There are three types of coins which have different probabilities of landing heads when
tossed.
• TypeAcoinsarefair,withprobability0.5ofheads
• TypeBcoinsarebiasedandhaveprobability0.7ofheads
• TypeCcoinsarebiasedandhaveprobability0.9ofheads
Suppose I have a drawer containing 5 coins: 2 of type A, 2 of type B, and 1 of type C. I
reach into the drawer and pick a coin at random. Without showing you the coin I flip it
onceandgetheads. WhatistheprobabilityitisTypeA?TypeB?TypeC?
11. Provethat
(a) P(A∩B) ≥ P(A)+P(B)−1
(b) P(A ∩A ∩···∩A ) ≥ P(A )+P(A )+···+P(A )−(n−1)
1 2 n 1 2 n
12. ConsidertwoeventsAandB suchthatP(A) > 1−δ,andP(B) > 1−δ,forverysmall
δ > 0. ProvethatP(A∩B)iscloseto1.
13. TheErdo˝s-RényimodelG(n,p)isasimplerandomgraphmodel,wherenisthenumber
ofnodesinthegraph. Inasocialnetworkingcontext,eachnodemightrepresentaperson.
Every pair of nodes is connected by an edge with probability p. The occurrence of each
edgeinthegraphisindependentofotheredgesinthegraph.
LetB betheeventthatagraphrandomlygeneratedaccordingtotheG(n,p)modelhas
n
at least one isolated node. We want to show that P(B ) ≤ n(1 − p)n−1 and conclude
n
thatforanyϵ > 0,ifp = p = (1+ϵ)ln(n),then
n n
lim P(B ) = 0.
n
n→∞
14. Each pack of Gold Cookies contains a coupon. There are n types of coupons available,
and each is independent of previously obtained coupons. The probability of getting ith
coupon is p , with Σp = 1. Let A denote the event that you have atleast one coupon of
i i i
typeiinthek alreadyobtainedcoupons. Answerthefollowing(assumei ̸= j)-
(a) P(A )
i
(b) P(A ∪A )
i j
(c) P(A |A )
i j
15. You are a contestant in a TV show. There are 3 doors leading to rooms of which 2 are
emptyand1containsaMercedes. Youareaskedtochooseoneroomandacorrectguess
will win you the Mercedes. After you select a room, the game master opens one of the
door of another room that you did not select and also that do not contain the Mercedes.
ProvethatyouwillimproveyourchancetowintheMercedesifyouchangeyourchoice
fromtheinitialguesstotheremainingcloseddoor. Mathematically
3
– E : EventofwinningtheMercedeswiththeinitialguess
1
– E : EventofwinningtheMercedesifhechangeshisinitialguess
2
– C : EventwhereyouknowoneoftheroomnotcontainingtheMercedes
ProvethatP(E ) < P(E |C)
1 2
16. A group of n men enter a restaurant and check their hats. The hat-checker is absent
minded, and upon leaving, she redistributes the hats back to the men at random. What
is the probability P that no man gets his correct hat, and how does P behave as n
n n
approachesinfinity?
17. You are given that at least one of the events A , 1 ≤ n ≤ N, will occur almost surely
n
i.e. P(∪N A ) = 1. Also no more than two occur almost surely. If P(A ) = p and
n=1 n n
P(A ∩A ) = q,m ̸= n,thenshowthatp ≥ 1 andq ≤ 2.
n m N N
18. Three friends are hanging out. To keep things simple, assume their birthdays are uni-
formly and independently distributed across the 365-day year. What’s the probability
that some (i.e. either two or three) of the people in this group have a birthday in com-
mon?
19. You invite some friends to a hat-themed party. As the night progresses, you decide to
play a game: everyone will line up and place their hat on the ground in front of them.
Theguestswillthenbereorderedrandomly,withallorderingsequallylikely. Afterward,
eachguestwillgrabthehatinfrontofthem.
We’re interested in the probability that at least one guest is wearing their own hat at the
end of the game. What does that probability converge to as the number of guests grows
infinitelylarge?
Let A be the event that ith person picks own hat. For example A represents that 5th
i 5
personpicksownhat.
We are interested in probability that at least one guest is wearing their own hat which is
P( (cid:83)N A ).
i=1 i
20. Let A, B be events such that P(A) = 1 and P(B) = 1. Find maximum possible values
4 2
forP(A∪B)&P(A∩B)
21. Assume a certain city X experience a hot day day with probability 0.4 and a cold day
with probability 0.6. Each hot day experiences rain with probability 0.2 while a cold
day experiences rain with probability 0.7. Given a particular day is rainy, what is the
probabilitythatthedayishot.
22. Let A be a sequence of events such that P(A ) = 1 ∀i ∈ N.A ’s partition the sample
i i 2i i
space. LetC beanothereventsuchthatP(C|A ) = 1 ∀i ∈ N. FindP(C)
i 3i
4
23. Let A and B be events such that P(A|B) > P(A). Show that P(B|A) > P(B) and
P(A|Bc) < P(A).
24. A positive integer is selected, with P(I = n) = 1 ,n = 1,2,···. If I takes the value n,
2n
acoinwithprobabilityofheadsequaltoe−n istossedonce. Findtheprobabilitythatthe
resultingtosswillbeahead.
25. GivenasequenceofeventsA ,A ,··· ,A satisfying
1 2 n
n
(cid:88) n
P(A ) = P(∪A ).
i i
i=1
i=1
ProvethatP(A ∩A ) = 0∀i,j,i ̸= j.
i j
26. Amanisknowntospeakthetruth3outof4times. Hethrowsadieandreportsthatitis
asix. Findtheprobabilitythatitisactuallyasix.
5